Add KEP 2464: Kubetest2 CI migration (#2465)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-testing/2464-kubetest2-ci-migration/README.md

- [Infrastructure Needed (Optional)](#infrastructure-needed-optional)
<!-- /toc -->

## Release Signoff Checklist

<!--
**ACTION REQUIRED:** In order to merge code into a release, there must be an
issue in [kubernetes/enhancements] referencing this KEP and targeting a release
milestone **before the [Enhancement Freeze](https://git.k8s.io/sig-release/releases)
of the targeted release**.

For enhancements that make changes to code or processes/procedures in core
Kubernetes—i.e., [kubernetes/kubernetes], we require the following Release
Signoff checklist to be completed.

Check these off as they are completed for the Release Team to track. These
checklist items _must_ be updated for the enhancement to be released.
-->

Items marked with (R) are required *prior to targeting to a milestone / release*.

- [x] (R) Enhancement issue in release milestone, which links to KEP dir in [kubernetes/enhancements] (not the initial KEP PR)
- [ ] (R) KEP approvers have approved the KEP status as `implementable`
- [x] (R) Design details are appropriately documented
- [x] (R) Test plan is in place, giving consideration to SIG Architecture and SIG Testing input
- [x] (R) Graduation criteria is in place

> - [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed

Reviewer: I suggested answers for the PRR
```suggestion
- [x] (R) Production readiness review completed
```

documentation such as release notes or a development roadmap. It should be
possible to collect this information before implementation begins, in order to
avoid requiring implementors to split their attention between writing release
notes and implementing the feature itself. KEP editors and SIG Docs
should help to ensure that the tone and content of the `Summary` section is
useful for a wide audience.

A good summary is probably at least a paragraph in length.

Both in this section and below, follow the guidelines of the [documentation
style guide]. In particular, wrap lines to a reasonable length, to make it
easier for reviewers to cite specific portions, and to minimize diff churn on
updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->

Kubernetes currently uses [Kubetest](https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/tree/master/kubetest) as the interface for launching and running e2e tests. 
It also uses a set of scripts called [“scenarios”](https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/tree/master/scenarios) for running common use cases such as setting up end-to-end tests or pushing CI builds.  

> Kubetest and scenarios have since both moved to [maintenance mode](https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/tree/master/kubetest#deprecation-notice), [(2)](https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/tree/master/scenarios#deprecation-notice)  due to lack of maintainability and has been planned to be replaced by [Kubetest2](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubetest2). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kubetest and scenarios have both been [deprecated](https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/tree/master/kubetest#deprecation-notice), [(2)](https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/tree/master/scenarios#deprecation-notice) for a while, with a recommendation to move jobs to [kubetest2](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubetest2). 
```

This KEP proposes a plan for migration/deprecation of CI jobs that are in the critical path of a release.

## Motivation

<!--
This section is for explicitly listing the motivation, goals, and non-goals of
this KEP.  Describe why the change is important and the benefits to users. The
motivation section can optionally provide links to [experience reports] to
demonstrate the interest in a KEP within the wider Kubernetes community.

[experience reports]: https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/ExperienceReports
-->

### Goals

- Converge towards a single community-supported e2e launcher tool for kubernetes
- Ensure all kubernetes/kubernetes release-blocking and merge-blocking jobs use the same e2e test tool, to reduce community maintenance burden, increase community troubleshooting awareness

> - Document guides for migrating jobs away from kubetest to kubetest2 to enable self-service (which will help for migrating away all the jobs)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Document guides for migrating jobs away from kubetest to kubetest2 to enable self-service migration of non-blocking jobs
```

- Accelerate the [migration from bootstrap.py to pod-utilities](https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/issues/20760) since Kubetest2 does not depend on bootstrap
- Enable SIG Release to deprecate legacy [push-build.sh](https://github.com/kubernetes/release#legacy)

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->

### Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

- Implementing kubetest2 deployers for all existing kubetest providers
    - kubetest2 enables implementing custom deployers out-of-tree so replacing all of the deployers upstream is not a hard requirement
- Migrate all 1700+ e2e jobs away from the deprecated e2e test tools (e.g. scenarios, bootstrap, kubetes)
    - This KEP only covers migrating all kubernetes/kubernetes release-blocking and merge-blocking jobs. 
    - We propose enforcing no further changes to the remaining deprecated tools to incentivize community migration and improvements to kubetest2.

>     - Other community efforts are already underway (e.g. [removing the kubernetes_build scenario](https://github.com/kubernetes/release/issues/1711))

Reviewer: /cc @justaugustus
not blocking but wanted to confirm this was accurate

- Backporting changes to older release branches
    - In general, no changes should be made to the release branches or their CI and the old jobs will age out.
- Decoupling from kubekins to a more minimal image
    - The kubekins image has become a kitchen-sink over the years, used by more jobs than necessary, and containing more dependencies than required for effective kubetest2 usage
    - Migrating kubekins away from bootstrap as a base image is only feasible once all jobs have migrated away from bootstrap, which is a non-goal of this KEP

## Proposal

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

For the development (main/master) branch only, **NOT** the existing release branches:

> - Create shadow canary jobs for each [presubmit-kubernetes-blocking](https://testgrid.k8s.io/presubmits-kubernetes-blocking), (release-blocking)[https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-release-master-blocking] to use kubetest2 as optional, non-blocking

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Create shadow canary jobs for each [presubmit-kubernetes-blocking](https://testgrid.k8s.io/presubmits-kubernetes-blocking), [release-blocking](https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-release-master-blocking) to use kubetest2 as optional, non-blocking
```

- Monitor these canary jobs till they are stable
- Make kubetest2 jobs non-optional, non-blocking
- Make kubetest2 jobs non-optional, blocking

No changes should be made to the release branches or their CI.

### User Stories (Optional)

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### Story 1

#### Story 2

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

> - Stage 1 of  shipping the kubetest2 binary involves keeping HEAD at kubetest2 unbroken (same as kubetest currently). 

Reviewer 2: @hasheddan we probably should target a v1.0.0/v1 release of k/release to freeze our API.

Reviewer 3: @saschagrunert would that be required as part of this KEP?

Reviewer 2: I think we can keep this a separate topic in k/release, WDYT?

#### Managing kubetest2 dependency

- Add a script to kubekins-e2e to fetch pre-built latest kubetest2 binaries (stored in GCS) as part of each job
- Distribute a tagged version of kubetest2 binary for each release and add to variants.yaml for kubekins-e2e
- Publish a kubetest2 specific images (optional)

### Test Plan

<!--
**Note:** *Not required until targeted at a release.*

Consider the following in developing a test plan for this enhancement:
- Will there be e2e and integration tests, in addition to unit tests?
- How will it be tested in isolation vs with other components?

No need to outline all of the test cases, just the general strategy. Anything
that would count as tricky in the implementation, and anything particularly
challenging to test, should be called out.

All code is expected to have adequate tests (eventually with coverage
expectations). Please adhere to the [Kubernetes testing guidelines][testing-guidelines]
when drafting this test plan.

[testing-guidelines]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-testing/testing.md
-->

### Graduation Criteria

> - This will be declared **alpha** when:

Reviewer: Taking a guess at where you'd like the kubetest2 dependency strategies and doc
```suggestion
- This will be declared **alpha** when:
    - Jobs fetch latest pre-built kubetest2 binaries at runtime
```

    - GCE jobs have corresponding kubetest2 shadow jobs on k/k master
    - Noop support is added for node deployer and build

> - This will be declared **beta** when:

Reviewer: I sorta wanted to suggest this in alpha but leave it to you
```suggestion
- This will be declared **beta** when:
    - A guide for migration from kubetest to kubetest2 exists
```

    - GCE jobs are monitored to be stable, and have moved over to kubetest2
    - Node, Scale jobs have corresponding shadow jobs on k/k master

> - This will be declared **GA** when:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- This will be declared **GA** when:
    - Jobs use pre-installed tagged versions of kubetest2 binaries
    - Tracking issues exist for each SIG to migrate their jobs from kubetest to kubetest2 
```

  CRI or CNI may require updating that component before the kubelet.
-->

## Production Readiness Review Questionnaire

<!--

Production readiness reviews are intended to ensure that features merging into
Kubernetes are observable, scalable and supportable; can be safely operated in
production environments, and can be disabled or rolled back in the event they
cause increased failures in production. See more in the PRR KEP at
https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-architecture/1194-prod-readiness.

The production readiness review questionnaire must be completed and approved
for the KEP to move to `implementable` status and be included in the release.

In some cases, the questions below should also have answers in `kep.yaml`. This
is to enable automation to verify the presence of the review, and to reduce review
burden and latency.

The KEP must have a approver from the
[`prod-readiness-approvers`](http://git.k8s.io/enhancements/OWNERS_ALIASES)
team. Please reach out on the
[#prod-readiness](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/CPNHUMN74) channel if
you need any help or guidance.

-->

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

> _This section must be completed when targeting alpha to a release._
> 
> * **How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?**
>   - [ ] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)
>     - Feature gate name:
>     - Components depending on the feature gate:
>   - [ ] Other
>     - Describe the mechanism:
>     - Will enabling / disabling the feature require downtime of the control
>       plane?
>     - Will enabling / disabling the feature require downtime or reprovisioning
>       of a node? (Do not assume `Dynamic Kubelet Config` feature is enabled).
> 
> * **Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?**
>   Any change of default behavior may be surprising to users or break existing
>   automations, so be extremely careful here.
> 
> * **Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back
>   the enablement)?**
>   Also set `disable-supported` to `true` or `false` in `kep.yaml`.
>   Describe the consequences on existing workloads (e.g., if this is a runtime
>   feature, can it break the existing applications?).
> 
> * **What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?**
> 
> * **Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?**
>   The e2e framework does not currently support enabling or disabling feature
>   gates. However, unit tests in each component dealing with managing data, created
>   with and without the feature, are necessary. At the very least, think about
>   conversion tests if API types are being modified.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
n/a (this is a build/test change for the kubernetes project, maintains parity with existing merge-blocking and release-blocking jobs)
```

### Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning

> _This section must be completed when targeting beta graduation to a release._
> 
> * **How can a rollout fail? Can it impact already running workloads?**
>   Try to be as paranoid as possible - e.g., what if some components will restart
>    mid-rollout?
> 
> * **What specific metrics should inform a rollback?**
> 
> * **Were upgrade and rollback tested? Was the upgrade->downgrade->upgrade path tested?**
>   Describe manual testing that was done and the outcomes.
>   Longer term, we may want to require automated upgrade/rollback tests, but we
>   are missing a bunch of machinery and tooling and can't do that now.
> 
> * **Is the rollout accompanied by any deprecations and/or removals of features, APIs, 
> fields of API types, flags, etc.?**
>   Even if applying deprecation policies, they may still surprise some users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
n/a (this is a build/test change for the kubernetes project, maintains parity with existing merge-blocking and release-blocking jobs)
```

### Monitoring Requirements

> _This section must be completed when targeting beta graduation to a release._
> 
> * **How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?**
>   Ideally, this should be a metric. Operations against the Kubernetes API (e.g.,
>   checking if there are objects with field X set) may be a last resort. Avoid
>   logs or events for this purpose.
> 
> * **What are the SLIs (Service Level Indicators) an operator can use to determine 
> the health of the service?**
>   - [ ] Metrics
>     - Metric name:
>     - [Optional] Aggregation method:
>     - Components exposing the metric:
>   - [ ] Other (treat as last resort)
>     - Details:
> 
> * **What are the reasonable SLOs (Service Level Objectives) for the above SLIs?**
>   At a high level, this usually will be in the form of "high percentile of SLI
>   per day <= X". It's impossible to provide comprehensive guidance, but at the very
>   high level (needs more precise definitions) those may be things like:
>   - per-day percentage of API calls finishing with 5XX errors <= 1%
>   - 99% percentile over day of absolute value from (job creation time minus expected
>     job creation time) for cron job <= 10%
>   - 99,9% of /health requests per day finish with 200 code
> 
> * **Are there any missing metrics that would be useful to have to improve observability 
> of this feature?**
>   Describe the metrics themselves and the reasons why they weren't added (e.g., cost,
>   implementation difficulties, etc.).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
n/a (this is a build/test change for the kubernetes project, not relevant to monitoring production clusters)
```

### Dependencies

> _This section must be completed when targeting beta graduation to a release._
> 
> * **Does this feature depend on any specific services running in the cluster?**
>   Think about both cluster-level services (e.g. metrics-server) as well
>   as node-level agents (e.g. specific version of CRI). Focus on external or
>   optional services that are needed. For example, if this feature depends on
>   a cloud provider API, or upon an external software-defined storage or network
>   control plane.
> 
>   For each of these, fill in the following—thinking about running existing user workloads
>   and creating new ones, as well as about cluster-level services (e.g. DNS):
>   - [Dependency name]
>     - Usage description:
>       - Impact of its outage on the feature:
>       - Impact of its degraded performance or high-error rates on the feature:
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
n/a (this is a build/test change for the kubernetes project, maintains parity with existing merge-blocking and release-blocking jobs)
```

### Scalability

> _For alpha, this section is encouraged: reviewers should consider these questions
> and attempt to answer them._
> 
> _For beta, this section is required: reviewers must answer these questions._
> 
> _For GA, this section is required: approvers should be able to confirm the
> previous answers based on experience in the field._
> 
> * **Will enabling / using this feature result in any new API calls?**
>   Describe them, providing:
>   - API call type (e.g. PATCH pods)
>   - estimated throughput
>   - originating component(s) (e.g. Kubelet, Feature-X-controller)
>   focusing mostly on:
>   - components listing and/or watching resources they didn't before
>   - API calls that may be triggered by changes of some Kubernetes resources
>     (e.g. update of object X triggers new updates of object Y)
>   - periodic API calls to reconcile state (e.g. periodic fetching state,
>     heartbeats, leader election, etc.)
> 
> * **Will enabling / using this feature result in introducing new API types?**
>   Describe them, providing:
>   - API type
>   - Supported number of objects per cluster
>   - Supported number of objects per namespace (for namespace-scoped objects)
> 
> * **Will enabling / using this feature result in any new calls to the cloud 
> provider?**
> 
> * **Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing size or count of 
> the existing API objects?**
>   Describe them, providing:
>   - API type(s):
>   - Estimated increase in size: (e.g., new annotation of size 32B)
>   - Estimated amount of new objects: (e.g., new Object X for every existing Pod)
> 
> * **Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing time taken by any 
> operations covered by [existing SLIs/SLOs]?**
>   Think about adding additional work or introducing new steps in between
>   (e.g. need to do X to start a container), etc. Please describe the details.
> 
> * **Will enabling / using this feature result in non-negligible increase of 
> resource usage (CPU, RAM, disk, IO, ...) in any components?**
>   Things to keep in mind include: additional in-memory state, additional
>   non-trivial computations, excessive access to disks (including increased log
>   volume), significant amount of data sent and/or received over network, etc.
>   This through this both in small and large cases, again with respect to the
>   [supported limits].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
n/a (this is a build/test change for the kubernetes project, maintains parity with existing merge-blocking and release-blocking jobs, including scalability jobs)
```

### Troubleshooting

> The Troubleshooting section currently serves the `Playbook` role. We may consider
> splitting it into a dedicated `Playbook` document (potentially with some monitoring
> details). For now, we leave it here.
> 
> _This section must be completed when targeting beta graduation to a release._
> 
> * **How does this feature react if the API server and/or etcd is unavailable?**
> 
> * **What are other known failure modes?**
>   For each of them, fill in the following information by copying the below template:
>   - [Failure mode brief description]
>     - Detection: How can it be detected via metrics? Stated another way:
>       how can an operator troubleshoot without logging into a master or worker node?
>     - Mitigations: What can be done to stop the bleeding, especially for already
>       running user workloads?
>     - Diagnostics: What are the useful log messages and their required logging
>       levels that could help debug the issue?
>       Not required until feature graduated to beta.
>     - Testing: Are there any tests for failure mode? If not, describe why.
> 
> * **What steps should be taken if SLOs are not being met to determine the problem?**
> 
> [supported limits]: https://git.k8s.io/community//sig-scalability/configs-and-limits/thresholds.md
> [existing SLIs/SLOs]: https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-scalability/slos/slos.md#kubernetes-slisslos

Reviewer: ```suggestion
n/a (this is a build/test change for the kubernetes project, not relevant to troubleshooting problems in production cluster)
```
